# DAO interfaces

```{contents} Contents
:depth: 4
```

A Data Access Object (DAO) is an interface that provides structured access to databases.

## DAO definition

DAOs are defined as interfaces annotated with `@Dao`.

Implementation classes for the DAO interfaces are automatically generated by the annotation processor during compilation.

## Query definition

[](query/index.md) can be defined using annotations.

You can use [](query-builder/index.md) or [](query-dsl.md) in a {ref}`dao-default-method` when you need to build queries dynamically in Java code.

(dao-default-method)=

## Default method

You can write Java code freely in default methods.

You can get the `Config` instance associated with a DAO instance by calling `Config.get` with the DAO instance as an argument.

```java
@Dao
public interface EmployeeDao {

    default int count() {
        Config config = Config.get(this);
        SelectBuilder builder = SelectBuilder.newInstance(config);
        builder.sql("select count(*) from employee");
        return builder.getScalarSingleResult(int.class);
    }
}
```

## Example

Implementation classes are automatically generated by the annotation processor during compilation.
These implementation classes can be directly instantiated and used.
However, if the configuration class is managed by a Dependency Injection (DI) container, the DI container should control the instantiation of the implementation classes.

```java
Config config = ...;
EmployeeDao employeeDao = new EmployeeDaoImpl(config);
Employee employee = employeeDao.selectById(1);
```

By default, the implementation class name is the interface name suffixed with `Impl`.
Please refer to [](annotation-processing.md) for information on how to customize the package name and suffix.

A DAO interface does not need to be defined in a one-to-one relationship with an entity class.
One DAO interface can handle multiple entity classes.

```java
@Dao
public interface MyDao {

    @Select
    Employee selectEmployeeById(int id);

    @Select
    Department selectDepartmentByName(String name);

    @Update
    int updateAddress(Address address);
}
```
